# Data Warehouse Overview

An environment/central hub for a companies entire dataset. Store literally everything extract from every data source.

Your ETL pipeline should feed data into the data warehouse, and the data should be highly structured and standardized for analytical processes

Typically there are three tiers to our data warehouse
- The front-end client that displays the results of analysis, generally as reports. This can also display data mining or other results
- Analytics server that queries the data and performs logic on it
- The database server that stores the data in databases

Usually our data warehouses are going to be based on extremely effecient SQL databases, because they can store 100's of thousands to 100's of millions of records from companies

## Data warehouse vs Traditional Databases

Data warehouses are designed for complex, resource intensive analytics and reporting over large conglomorate data sets, while tradional databases are used for trasaction processing

Data warehouses have collections of data from many sources, while tradition databases capture data as is from a singular source

Data warehouses will have a schedule of activities, like bulk writes to the warehouse, while traditional databases are optimized for continuous event driven operations

Data warehouses will generally use a Star Schema or a Snowflake Schema as opposed to a normalized schema

Data warehouses are often columnar in storage, they store table data by column instead of rows. While traditional databases will store information by rows.

## Data Lakes

Centeralized repositories for all data in a company or large organization.

Unlike data warehouses it can store structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data

Data lakes can be SQL, NOSQL, or even some massive excel sheet somewhere with very little structure

These will typically be used as input for our ETL, where as the output of our transformation process will be stored in our data warehouse.

They will overall be cheaper because they overall store less data, and are less efficient than our larger, faster data warehouses.

## Data Warehouse Vendors

Most of our super popular cloud service providers will have some sort of data warehouse service with various pricing. Many of these will charge by the Terabyte of data stored per month, just to put into perspective how much data is stored in a dataware house.

Some cloud vendors include:
- Amazon Redshift
- Google BigQuery
- Azure Synapse Analytics
- Db2 Warehouse on the Cloud
- Snowflake

# Data Warehouse vs Data Marts

Smaller, specialized data warehouses, typically composed of a subset of a larger data warehouse

Data marts will focus on a single subject area, a part of the company so there is an independent resource that department or unit of the company can go to for its analytics

The smaller size of the marts allow for independent and targeted analytics to be run on the relevant data.

Image you have a store with several different departments. You could store says numbers for the entire store on a data warehouse, then have several data marts for things like each sale department, music, games, outdoor, etc.

# Star Schema

An unormalized relational databse schema often used in a data warehouse.

The schema has a fact table in the center, and any number of dimensional tables around it. This creates a schema that looks like a star

The fact table contains specific measurable primary data to be used in analysis. This ultimately means that it is the center table of the schema with Foreign Keys to all the dimension tables

Dimension tables examples can include:
- Simple queries
- Simplified analytics
- Fast Aggregation
- OLAP cube feeding

Disadvantages of using Star schema
- Data is not as flexible as a normal schema
- Data integrity generally enforced by normalization is easily broken
- Many to many relationships are generally not represented
- High redundancy of data

## Snowflake schema

Another common data warehouse schema that is similar to the star schema, but the dimension tables have some degree of normalization

This produces sub-dimensional tables that are referenced by Foreign keys in the primary dimensional tables

Advantages:
- Data redundancy is reduced allowing for reduced storage needs
- More flexibility in data drawn from queries

Disadvantage:
- Additional complexity in queries

# Data Warehouse Demo

1. Go to https://console.cloud.google.com/bigquery

2. Click on the three dots next to our project and choose 'Create Dataset'

3. Give it a name and leave the rest default

4. Click the three dots next to our dataset and choose create table
    - Choose Create table from Upload
    - Pick our file
    - Give the table a name
    - Auto detect the schema

5. Make some queries
```
SELECT * FROM `javagcp-339914.testing.songs` LIMIT 1000;
SELECT COUNT(distinct string_field_1) as artist_count FROM `javagcp-339914.testing.songs`;
SELECT distinct string_field_1 as artists FROM `javagcp-339914.testing.songs`;
SELECT distinct string_field_1 as artists FROM `javagcp-339914.testing.songs` order by artists;
SELECT * FROM `javagcp-339914.testing.songs` WHERE string_field_1 = 'Post Malone';
```