# OLTP to OLAP Rewind

## OLTP Review

Online Transaction Processing

These are user-oriented applications that serve the main function of the business usually. These can be web apps or mobile apps or even something like an ATM.

These need fast response times, generally manage small amounts of data at time.

Generally, uses some indexed data for fast retrieval.

Requires frequent or concurrent database backups however is generally not concerned with historical data.

Runs simple queries involving small amounts of information.

These are generally the three-layered applications that we have been designing throughout training.

## OLAP Overview

Online Analysis Processing

These are going to be our analytical system generally for internal business use

The system will need to perform complex queries in order to understand the entirety of the data and draw some conclusions

These types of processes are generally highly resource intensive, and can take a significant amount of time

Because of this our data will generally be updated in batches
- End of the quarter or week
- Slowly changing data

These systems will be denormalized dimensional databases

## Dimensional Databases:

Databases that are:
- Partly denormalized
- Designed for easy queries
- Using the star or snowflake schema

# Messaging Review

Messaging, and messaging queues allow us to implement a pub/sub design pattern with different components of our systems.

The pub/sub design pattern, and messaing allow us to develop in a more asynchronous way, when ever we get data, we can simply subscribe to it, or simply choose to ignore it.

Messaging services typically will use queues, which are a data structure where the element/piece of data in line is the first one consumed, so on and so forth.

# Data Lifecycle, Applications, Messaging

## How do they fit together?

So lets put this all together

When it comes to data, our application will constantly be interacting with our users and in essense generating data for us.

Outside of our customer facing application AKA possibly a OLTP, most businesses will have internal tools they have written to gather data to be stored in their databases, and they may also gather data from outside sources.

The business could implement a messaging queue between their data gathering tools, the client facing application, and many other tools they use to feed data into a interal tool to do something with that data.

The interal tool can subsribe each time a message comes through the queue with data, and then take that data and start our ETL process.

During the ETL process we can transform the data to conform to whatever data warehouse we are storing the data in. And load the data into the said warehouse so the company can run analysis later.

Finally our OLAP system can use the data warehouse we have been loading with data to give our company insights that we may need to make decisions moving forward.